Mr, Speaker, Mr. President, my col leagues in the Congress, our distin guished guests, my fellow Americans— as this 92d Congress begins its session, America has lost a great Senator, and all of us who had the privilege to know him have lost a loyal friend.

I had the privilege of visiting Senator Russell in the hospital just a few days before he died. He never spoke about himself. He only spoke eloquently about the need for a strong national defense.

In tribute to one of the most magnifi cent Americans of all time, I respect fully ask that all those here will rise in silent prayer for Senator Russell.

Thank you. Thank you.

Mr. Speaker, before I begin my for mal address, I want to use this oppor tunity to congratulate all of those who were winners in the rather spirited con tests for leadership positions in the House and the Senate, and also to ex press my condolences to the losers. I know how both of you feel.

And I particularly want to join with all of the members of the House and the Senate as well in congratulating the new Speaker of the United States Congress.

And to those new members of this house who may have some doubts about the possibilities for advancement in the years ahead, I would remind you that the Speaker and I met just 24 years ago in this chamber as freshmen mem bers of the 80th Congress. As you see, we both have come up in the world since them.

Chance for Greatness

Mr. Speaker, this 92d Congress has a chance to be recorded as the greatest Congress in America's history.

In these troubled years Just past, America has been going through a long nightmare of war and division, of crime and inflation. Even more deeply, we have gone through a long, dark night of the American spirit. But now that night is ending. Now we must let our spirits soar again. Now we are ready for the lift of a driving dream.

The people of this nation are eager to get on with the quest for new great ness. They see challenges and are pre pared to meet those challenges. It is for us here to open the doors that will set free again the real greatness of this nation — the genius of the American people.

How shall we meet this challenge? How can we truly open the doors, and set free the full genius of our people?

The way in which the 92d Congress answers these questions will determine its place in history. But, more important, it can determine this nation's place in history as we enter the third century of our independence.

Tonight, I shall present to the Con gress six great goals. I shall ask not simply for more new programs in the old framework. I shall ask to change the framework of government itself—to re form the entire structure of American government so we can make it again fully responsive to the needs and the wishes of the American people.

If we act boldly — if we seize this moment and achieve these goals — we can close the gap between promise and performance in American government. We can bring together the resources of this nation and the spirit of the Ameri can people.

In discussing these great goals, I shall deal tonight only with matters on the domestic side of the nation's agenda. I shall make a separate report to the Congress and the nation next month on developments in foreign policy.

The first of these great goal is al ready before the Congress.

I urge that the unfinished business of the 91st Congress be made the first pri ority business of the 92d.

Call for Welfare Reform

Over the next two weeks, I will call upon Congress to take action on more than 35 pieces of proposed legislation on which action was not completed last.

The most important is welfare reform.

The present welfare system has be come a monstrous, consuming outrage— an outrage against the community, against the taxpayer, and particularly against the children it is supposed to help.

Now, we honestly disagree, as we do, on what to do about it. But we can all agree that we must meet the challenge not by pouring more money into a bad program but by abolishing the present welfare system and adopting a new one.

And, so, let us place a floor under the income of every family with children in America — and without those demean ing, soul‐stifling affronts to human dig nity that so blight the lives of welfare children today. But let us also establish an effective work incentive, an effec tive work requirement.

Let us provide the means by which more can help themselves. This shall be our goal. Let us generously help those who are not able to help themselves. But let us stop helping those who are able to help themselves but refuse to do so.

The second great goal is to achieve what Americans have not enjoyed since 1957 — full prosperity in peacetime.

The tide of inflation has turned. The rise in the cost of living, which had been gathering dangerous momentum in the late sixties, was reduced last year. Inflation will be further reduced this year.

But as we have moved from runaway inflation toward reasonable price sta bility, and at the same time, as we have been moving from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy, we have paid a price in increased unemployment.

We should take no comfort from the fact that the level of unemployment in this transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy is lower than in any peacetime year of the sixties.

This is not good enough for the man who is unemployed in the seventies. We must do better for workers in peace time and we will do better.

And to achieve this, I will submit an expansionary budget this year—one that will help stimulate the economy and thereby open up new job opportunities for millions of Americans.

It will be a full‐employment budget, a budget designed to be in balance if the economy were operating at its peak po tential. By spending as if we were at full employment, we will help to bring about full employment.

I ask the Congress to accept these expansionary policies — to accept the concept of the full‐employment budget.

And at the same time, I ask the Con gress to cooperate in resisting expendi tures that go beyond the limits of the full‐employment budget. For as we wage a campaign to bring about a widely shared prosperity, we must not re‐ignite the fires of inflation and so undermine that prosperity.

With the stimulus and the discipline of the full‐employment budget; with the commitment of the independent Federal Reserve System to provide fully for the monetary needs of a growing economy; and with a much greater effort on the part of labor and management to make their wage and price decisions in the light of the national interest and their own self‐interest—then for the worker, the farmer, the consumer, for Ameri cans everywhere we shall gain the goal of a new prosperity: more jobs, more income, more profits, without inflation and without war.

This is a great goal, and one that we can achieve together.

The third great goal is to continue the effort so dramatically begun last year: to restore and enhance our nat ural environment.

Building on the foundation laid in the 37 ‐ point program that I submitted to Congress last year, I will propose a strong new set of initiatives to clean up our air and water, to combat noise, and to preserve and restore our surroundings.

I will propose programs to make bet ter use of our land, to encourage a balanced national growth — growth that will revitalize our rural heartland and enhance the quality of life in America.

And not only to meet today's needs but to anticipate those of tomorrow, I will put forward the most extensive pro gram ever proposed by a President of the United States to expand the nation's parks, recreation areas, open spaces in a way that truly brings parks to the people where the people are. For only if we have a legacy of parks will the next generation have parks to enjoy.

As a fourth great goal, I will offer a far‐reaching set of proposals for im proving America's health care and mak ing it available more fairly to more peo ple.

I will propose:

¶A program to insure that no Amer ican family will be prevented from ob taining basic medical care by inability to pay.

¶I will propose a major increase in and redirection of aid to medical schools, to greatly increase the number of doc tors and other health personnel.

¶Incentives to improve the delivery of health services, to get more medical care resources into those areas that have not been adequately served, to make greater use of medical assistants and to slow the alarming rise in the costs of medical care.

¶New programs to encourage better preventive medicine, by attacking the causes of disease and injury, and by providing incentives to doctors to keep people well rather than just to treat them when they are sick.

Plans Drive on Cancer

I will also ask for an appropriation of an extra $100‐million to launch an in tensive campaign to find a cure for cancer, and I will ask later for whatever additional funds can effectively be used. The time has come in America when the same kind of concentrated effort that split the atom and took man to the moon should be turned toward conquer ing this dread disease. Let us make a total national commitment to achieve this goal.

America has long been the wealthi est nation in the world. Now it is time we became the healthiest nation in the world.

The fifth great goal is to strengthen and to renew our state and local govern ments.

As we approach our 200th anniversary in 1976, we remember that this nation launched itself as a loose confedera tion of separate states, without a work able central government. At the time, the mark of its leaders' vision was that they quickly saw the need to balance the separate powers of the states with a government of central powers.

And so they gave us a Constitution of balanced powers, of unity with diversity — and so clear was their vision that it survives today as the oldest written Constitution still in force in the world.

For almost two centuries since — and dramatically in the nineteen‐thirties — at those great turning points when the question has been between the states and the Federal Government, that ques tion had been resolved in favor of stronger central Federal Government.

During this time the nation grew and the nation prospered. But one thing his tory tells us is that no great movement goes in the same direction forever. Na tions change, they adapt, or they slowly die.

The time has now come in America to reverse the flow of power and re sources from the states and communi ties to Washington and start power and resources flowing back from Washing ton to the states and communities and, more important, to the people, all across America.

The time has come for a new partner ship between the Federal Government and the states and localities'a part nership in which we entrust the states and localities with a larger share of the nation's responsibilities, and in which we share our Federal revenues with them so that they can meet those responsi bilities.

Revenue Sharing Proposed

To achieve this goal, I propose to the Congress tonight that we enact a plan of revenue sharing historic in scope and bold in concept.

All across America today, states and cities are confronted with a financial cri sis. Some have already been cutting back on essential services — for example, just recently San Diego and Clevelana cut back on trash collections. Most are caught between the prospects of bank ruptcy, on the one hand, and adding to an already crushing tax burden, on the other.

One indication of the rising costs of local government, I discovered the other day that my home town of Whittier, Calif.—which has a population of 67,000 —has a larger budget for 1971 than the entire Federal budget was in 1791.

Now the time has come to take new direction, and once again to intro duce a new and more creative balance to our approach to government.

And, so, let us put the money where the needs are. And let us put the power to spend it where the people are.

I propose that the Congress make a $16‐billion investment in renewing state and local government—$5‐billion of this will be in new and unrestricted funds, to be used as the states and localities see fit. The other $11‐billion will be provided by allocating $1‐billion of new funds and converting one‐third of the money going to the present narrow‐pur pose aid programs into Federal revenue sharing funds for six broad purposes for urban development, rural develop ment education, transportation, job training, and law enforcement—but with the states and localities making their own decisions on how it should be spent within each category.

For the next fiscal year, this would increase total Federal aid to the states and localities more than 25 per cent over the present level.

The revenue‐sharing proposals I send to the Congress will include the safe guards against discrimination that ac company of all other Federal funds allo tted to the states. Neither the Presi dent nor the Congress nor the consci ence of this nation can permit money which comes from all the people to be used in a way which discriminates against some of them.

The Federal Government will still have a large and vital role to play in achieving our national purposes. Estab lished functions that are clearly and es sentially Federal in nature will still be performed by the Federal Government. New functions that need to be spon sored or performed by the Federal Gov ernment — such as those I have urged tonight in welfare and health — will be added to the Federal agenda. Whenever it makes the best sense for us to act as a whole nation, the Federal Government should and will lead the way. But where state or local governments can better do what needs to be done, let us see that they have the resources to do it there.

Under this plan, the Federal Govern ment will provide the states and locali ties with more money and less inter ference — and by cutting down the in terference the same amount of money will go a lot further.

Let us share our resources:

Let us share them to rescue the states and localities from the brink of financial crisis.

Let us share them to give homeown ers and wage earners a chance to es cape from every higher property taxes and sales taxes.

Americans Are Fed Up

Let us share our resources for two other reasons as well.

The first of these reasons has to do with government itself, and the second has to do with each of us—with the individual.

Let's face it. Most Americans today are simply fed up with government at all leveles. They will not — and they should not — continue to tolerate the gap between promise and performance in government.

The fact is that we made the Federal Government so strong it grows muscle bound and the states and localities so weak they approch impotence.

If we put more power in more places, we can make government more creative in more places. That way we multi ply the number of people with the abil ity to make things happen. We can open the way to a new burst of crea tive energy throughout America.

The final reason I urge this historic shift is much more personal, for each and every one of us.

As everything seems to have grown bigger and more complex in America, as the forces that shape our lives seem to have grown more distant and more impersonal, a great feeling of frustra tion has crept across this land.

Whether it is the workingman who feels neglected, the black man who feels oppressed or the mother con cerned about her children, there has been a growing feeling that “things are in the saddle, and ride mankind.”

Millions of frustrated young Ameri cans today are crying out— asking not what will government do for me, but what can I do, what can I contribute, how can I matter?

And so, let us answer them. Let us say to them and let us say to all Ameri cans: “We hear you. We will give you chance. We are going to give you a new chance to have more to say about the decisions that affect your future—a chance to participate in government— because we are going to provide more centers of power where what you do can make a difference that you can see and feel in your own lives and the life of your whole community.”

The further away government is from people, the stronger government be comes and the weaker people become. And a nation with a strong govern ment and a weak people is an empty shell.

I reject the patronizing idea that gov ernment in Washington, D.C., is inevi tably more wise, more honest and more efficient than government at the local or state level. The honesty and effi cency of government depends on people. Government at all levels has good people and bad people. And the way to get more good people into government is to give them more opportunity to do good things.

The idea that a bureaucratic élite in Washington knows best what is best for people everywhere and that you cannot trust local government is really a con tention that you cannot trust people to govern themselves. This notion is com pletely foreign to the American experi ence. Local government is the govern ment closest to the people; it's most responsive to the individual person; is people's government in a far more intimate way than the Government in Washington can ever be.

People came to America because they wanted to determine their own future rather than to live in a country where others determined their future for them.

What this change means is that once again in America we are placing our trust in people.

I have faith In people. I trust the judgment of people. Let us give the people of America a chance, a bigger voice in deciding for themselves those questions that so greatly affect their lives.

The sixth great goal is the complete reform of the Federal Government itself.

Based on a long and intensive study with the aid of the best advice ob tainable, I have concluded that a sweep ing reorganization of the executive branch is needed if the Government is to keep up with the times and with the needs of the people.

I propose therefore that we reduce the present 12 Cabinet departments to eight. I propose that the Department of State, Treasury, Defense and Justice re main, but that all the other departments be consolidated into four: human re sources, community development, nat ural resurces, and ecnomic development.

Let us look at what these would be:

First, a department dealing with the concerns of people — as individuals, as members of a family — a department focused on human needs.

Second, a department concerned with the community — rural communities and urban communities — and with all that it takes to make a community function as a community.

And, third, a department concerned with our physical environment, with the preservation and balanced use of those great natural resources on which our na tion depends.

And, fourth, a department concerned with our prosperity — with our jobs, our businesses, and those many activi ties that keep our economy running smoothly and well.

Goal of Solving Problems

Under this plan, rather than dividing up our departments by narrow subjects, we would organize them around the great purposes of government. Rather than scattering responsibility by adding new levels of bureaucracy, we would focus and concentrate the responsibility for getting problems solved.

With these four departments, when we have a problem we will know where to go — and the department will have the authority and the resources to do something about it.

Over the years we have added de partments and created agencies at the Federal level, each to serve a new con stituency or to handle a particular task —and these have grown and multiplied in what has become a hopeless confu sion of form and function.

The time has come to match our struc ture to our purposes — to look with fresh eye, to organize the Govern ment by conscious, comprehensive de sign to meet the new needs of a new era.

One hundred years ago, Abraham Lin coln stood on a battlefield and spoke of a government of the people, by the peo ple and for the people. Too often since then, we have become a nation of the Government, by the Government, and for the Government.

By enacting these reforms, we can re new that principle that Lincoln stated so simply and so well.

By giving everyone's voice a chance to be heard, we have Government that truly is of the people.

By creating more centers of meaning ful power, more places where decisions that really count can be made, by giv ing more people a chance to do some thing, we can have government that truly is by the people.

And by setting up a completely mod ern, functional system of Government at the national level, we in Washington will at last be able to provide Government that truly is for the people.

I realize that what I am asking is that not only the executive branch in Washington but that even this Congress will have a change by giving up some of its power.

Change is hard. But without change there can be no progress. And for each of us the question then becomes, not “Will change cause me inconvenience?” but “Will change bring progress for America?”

Giving up power is hard. But I would urge all of you, as leaders of this coun try, to remember that the truly revered leaders in world history are those who gave power to people, not those who took it away.

Calls for Sense of History

As we consider these reforms we will be acting, not for the next two years or for the next 10 years, but for the next hundred years.

So let us approach these six great goals with a sense, not only of the mo ment in history, but also of history it self.

Let us act with the willingness to work together and the vision and the boldness and the courage of those great Americans who met in Philadelphia al most 190 years ago to write a Consti tution.

Let us leave a heritage as they did— not just for our children but for millions yet unborn—of a nation where every American will have a chance not only to live in peace and to enjoy prosperity and opportunity, but to participate in a sys tem of government where he knows not only his votes but his ideas count — a system of government which will pro vide the means for America to reach heights of achievement undreamed of before.

Those men who met in Philadelphia left a great heritage because they had a vision — not only of what the nation was, but of what it could become.

When I think of that vision, I recall that America was founded as the land of the open door—a haven for the op pressed, a land of opportunity, a place of refuge and hope.

When the first settlers opened the door of America three and a half cen turies ago, they came to escape perse cution and to find opportunity — and they left wide the door of welcome for others to follow.

When the 13 colonies declared their independence almost two centuries ago, they opened the door to a new vision of liberty and of human fulfillment not just for an élite, but for all.

To the generations that followed, America's was the open door that beck oned millions from the old world to the new in search of a better life, a freer life, a fuller life, and in which by their own decisions they could shape their own destinies.

For the black American, the Indian, the Mexican‐American, and for those oth ers in our land who have not had an equal chance, the nation at last has be gun to confront the need to press open the door of full and equal opportunity, and of human dignity.

For all Americans, with these changes I have proposed tonight, we can open the door to a new era of opportunity. We can open the door to full and effec tive participation in the decisions that affect their lives. We can open the door to a new partnership among govern ments of all levels—between those gov ernments and the people themselves. And by so doing, we can open wide the doors of human fulfillment for millions of people here in America now and in the years to come.

Looks to ‘Splendid’ Record

In the next few weeks I will spell out in greater detail the way I propose that we achieve these six great goals. I ask this Congress to be responsive. If it is, then the 92d Congress—your Con gress, our Congress—at the end of its term, will be able to look back on a record more splendid than any in our history.

This can be the Congress that helped us end the longest war in the na tion's history, and end it in a way that will give us at last a genuine chance to enjoy what we have not had in this cen tury—a full generation of peace.

This can be the Congress that helped achieve an expanding economy, with full employment and without inflation — and without the deadly stimulus of war.

This can be the Congress that re formed a welfare system that has robbed recipients of their dignity and robbed states and cities of their resources.

This can be the Congress that pressed forward the rescue of our environment, and established for the next generation an enduring legacy of parks for the people.

This can be the Congress that launched a new era in American medi cine, in which the quality of medical care was enhanced while the costs were made less burdensome.

But above all, what this Congress can be remembered for is opening the way to a New American Revolution — a peaceful revolution in which power was turned back to the people — in which government at all levels was refreshed and renewed, and made truly responsive. This can be a revolution as profound, as far‐reaching, as exciting, as that first revolution almost 200 years ago — and it can mean that just five years from now America will enter its third century as a young na tion new in spirit, with all the vigor and the freshness with which it began its first century.

My colleagues in the Congress—these are great goals. They can make the ses sions of this Congress a great moment for America. And so, let us pledge to gether to go forward together — by achieving these goals to give America the foundation today for a new great ness tomorrow and in all the years to come—and in so doing to make this the greatest Congress in the history of this great and good country.

